Title:
Show HN: ggterm – Grammar of Graphics in the terminal, built for AI coding assistants

URL: https://github.com/shandley/ggterm

Top-level comment:

Hey HN. I built ggterm because of a gap in AI-assisted workflows. Coding assistants like Claude Code and Codex are great at manipulating data in the terminal, but the moment you want to see something, you have to switch to R/Python/Jupyter, reload the data, and write plotting code in a different language. That breaks the conversational flow.

ggterm is a Grammar of Graphics engine in TypeScript. Every plot is a declarative JSON spec (a PlotSpec) that gets rendered two ways: as terminal ASCII art for instant feedback, and as interactive Vega-Lite in a companion browser viewer for publication-quality output. 66 geometry types, 75 scales, faceting, themes.

Try it in 30 seconds:

  npx ggterm-plot setup
  npx ggterm-plot iris sepal_length sepal_width species "Iris" point

That works standalone, no AI needed. But if you're in Claude Code or another AI assistant, you can also say:

  "Plot my data as a scatter plot, color by group"
  "Add labels to the outliers"
  "Style for Nature journal and export as SVG"

Each step modifies the JSON spec and the viewer updates live via SSE. No code generated, no tool switching.

It also includes domain-specific chart types for scientific work (volcano plots, Kaplan-Meier survival curves, Manhattan plots, forest plots, ROC curves) and built-in datasets so you can explore immediately. Works on HPC clusters too. It auto-detects SLURM/PBS compute nodes and prints the correct SSH tunnel command.

The architecture is simple: PlotSpec (JSON) goes to two backends (terminal renderer, Vega-Lite exporter). Adding a new backend means implementing one function. The AI integration is 8 deterministic skill files, not a prompt chain. The assistant calls specific CLI commands rather than generating arbitrary plotting code.

Happy to answer questions about the design or the Grammar of Graphics implementation.
